---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/220527-doklad-zhiznennyj-mir/","dgHomeLink":false,"dgPassFrontmatter":false}
---

# Жизненный мир
Интерпретации жизненного мира
1. [[@steinbock1995|Steinbock A. 1995. Home and Beyond: Generative Phenomenology after Husserl. Northwestern University Press.]]
2. [[@geniusas2012|Geniusas S. 2012. The Origins of the Horizon in Husserl’s Phenomenology. Dordrecht: Springer.]]
3. [[@lee2019|Lee N.-I. 2019. The Pluralistic Concept of the Life-World and the Various Fields of the Phenomenology of the Life-World // Husserl Husserl Studies 36 (1).]]
4. [[@sowa2008|Sowa R. 2008. Einleitung des Herausgebers // Husserl E. (Hua XXXIX). Die Lebenswelt: Auslegungen der vorgegebenen Welt und ihrer Konstitution. Dordrecht: Springer.]]

Жизненный мир и региональные онтологии
1. [[@landgrebe1981|Landgrebe L. 1981. Regions of Being and Regional Ontologies in Husserl's Phenomenology // The Phenomenology of Edmund Husserl: Six Essays. Ithaca & London: Cornell University Press.]]
2. [[@ströker2013|Ströker E. 2013. The Husserlian foundations of science. Springer.]]
3. [[@carr2020|Carr D. 2020. On Thomas Seebohm’s History as a Science and the System of the Sciences // Thomas Seebohm on the Foundations of the Sciences. Contributions to Phenomenology. Springer.]]

### 1. Provisional and transcendental concepts of the life-world (Steinbock)
1. Provisional (natural) concepts of the life-world
	1. The life-world as what is in principle intuitable
	2. The life-world as a foundation of sense
	3. The life-world as the realm of subjective-relative truths
	4. The life-world as an essential structure, as the perceptual world (**ontology of the life-world**)
2. Transcendental concepts of the life-world
	1. World as ground (Welt als Boden)
	2. World as universal horizon


### 2. Conscious world and experienced world (Geniusas)
1. World as totality
2. World as world-horizon
	1. World as ground
	2. Experienced world
		1. World as universal horizon
		2. World as life-world


<div class="transclusion internal-embed is-loaded"><div class="markdown-embed">

<div class="markdown-embed-title">



</div>


==⚠  Switch to EXCALIDRAW VIEW in the MORE OPTIONS menu of this document. ⚠==


# Text Elements
World ^Fd9hyD1U

World as totality ^ML76yzfK

World-horizon ^QP8HrpNw

World as ground ^BPag2WLO

Experienced world ^blO0p9hn

World as universal horizon ^fESbsL4M

World as life-world ^mrPrvoxn



</div></div>



### 3. Pluralistic understanding of the life-world (Lee)
1. Natural and transcendental concepts
2. Empirical and eidetic concepts concepts
3. In narrower sense (perceptual world) and in wider sense (cultural and scientific worlds)
4. General world and particular concepts


### 4. World as multidimensional sense-structure (Sowa)
> Die von Husserl thematisierte Lebenswelt ist ein multidimensionales Sinngebilde… Die im vorliegenden Band durch zehn thematische Textgruppen vertretenen Sinndimensionen und Aspekte der Lebenswelt stellen… einen Teil der zum konkreten Sinngebilde „Lebenswelt“ gehörigen Dimensionen und Aspekte dar… Die Anordnung der Textgruppen ist nicht Ausdruck einer der Lebenswelt inhärenten Systematik. Bis auf die drei ersten Textgruppen, in denen mit „Vorgegebenheit“, „Horizonthaftigkeit“ und „Orientierungsstruktur“ grundlegende Gegebenheitsweisen der Lebenswelt behandelt werden und deren Voranstellung daher sachlich nahe lag, ist die Aufeinanderfolge der Textgruppen relativ beliebig und auch sekundär; denn in ihnen kommen Momente des komplexen Sinnganzen „Lebenswelt“ zur Sprache, von denen jedes für dieses Ganze gleich notwendig ist. ([[@sowa2008|Sowa 2008]], LIX-LXII).


### 5.  Ontology of the life-world and regional ontologies
> Yet even regional ontology can still not be regarded as that mode of investigation which can disclose the phenomenological foundations of science in a radical sense.
> Regional ontology, as it was initiated by Husserl, had been unreflectively established on the basis of the pre-given sciences, the diversity of which had come about through the divisions, distinctions, and mutual differentiations which occurred in the course of their factual historical development. 
> To comprehend the meaning of science, and diverse branches of the sciences, in the epistemological rather than historical sense, Husserl had to search for a basis which is deep enough to stand at the root of the diversity of the sciences, neutral to each one, and yet common to them all.
> That the "ground" of the sciences, to use Husserl's telling phrase, is not to be identified with any concrete life-world does not at all follow from the historical variability of the latter as opposed to the unique universality of modern mathematical physics in the Galleon-Newtonian style. ([[@ströker2013|Ströker 2013]], 14-16).

> But in the lectures on phenomenological psychology of 1925, Husserl looks elsewhere for the unity of the world and the relation among the regions. In this text, in which Husserl also returns to Avenarius’s expression der natürliche Weltbegriff… Thus, the unity of the three regions is to be found not at the scientific level but in the pre-scientific world of the natural attitude, a conception that presages that of the lifeworld in the Crisis. In other words, the world is unified prior to and independently of its being theoretically divided into regions, not after it has been so divided. But the lifeworld of the Crisis, and the natural attitude (or natural world-life, as Husserl sometimes calls it) that corresponds to it, is prior to all regions, prior to all scientific or even proto-scientific attitudes, prior even to all practical attitudes that divide up the world for some purpose or other. ([[@carr2020|Carr 2020]], 6-7)


## Литература
- [[@carr2020|Carr D. 2020. On Thomas Seebohm’s History as a Science and the System of the Sciences // Thomas Seebohm on the Foundations of the Sciences. Contributions to Phenomenology. Springer.]]
- [[@geniusas2012|Geniusas S. 2012. The Origins of the Horizon in Husserl’s Phenomenology. Dordrecht: Springer.]]
- [[@landgrebe1981|Landgrebe L. 1981. Regions of Being and Regional Ontologies in Husserl's Phenomenology // The Phenomenology of Edmund Husserl: Six Essays. Ithaca & London: Cornell University Press.]]
- [[@lee2019|Lee N.-I. 2019. The Pluralistic Concept of the Life-World and the Various Fields of the Phenomenology of the Life-World // Husserl Husserl Studies 36 (1).]]
- [[@sowa2008|Sowa R. 2008. Einleitung des Herausgebers // Husserl E. (Hua XXXIX). Die Lebenswelt: Auslegungen der vorgegebenen Welt und ihrer Konstitution. Dordrecht: Springer.]]
- [[@steinbock1995|Steinbock A. 1995. Home and Beyond: Generative Phenomenology after Husserl. Northwestern University Press.]]
- [[@ströker2013|Ströker E. 2013. The Husserlian foundations of science. Springer.]]



[[220527 доклад_стартовая заметка|🏠]]