---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/220621-essay-concepts-of-the-life-world-and-the-life-form-as-a-solution-to-mannheim-s-paradox/","dgHomeLink":false,"dgPassFrontmatter":false}
---

# Essay “Concepts of the Life-World and the Life-Form as a Solution to Mannheim’s Paradox”


## Introduction
How is social knowledge possible? If everything we claim is a representation of our own interests, presuppositions or a cultural background of which we are unaware, then this casts doubt on the possibility of any objective knowledge at all. This problem is best formulated by Karl Mannheim in his “Ideology and Utopia” ([[@mannheim1936|Mannheim 1936]]). He shows us that every concept of ideology becomes part of its own referent. The paradox he arrives at demonstrates that there is no non-ideological discourse about ideology. Geertz believes that it is precisely in this paradox that the problem of the disinterested observer, the objectivity of sociological knowledge, and the epistemological status of the social sciences in general is most clearly manifested ([[@geertz1973|Geertz 1973]], 195). Just as Zeno's paradox articulates the problem of the validity of mathematical deduction (ibid.), Mannheim's paradox articulates the problem of the objectivity of sociological analysis. He thematizes the proposition that social thought does not grow out of incorporeal reflection, but is “always connected with the present life situation of the thinker” ([[@mannheim1936|Mannheim 1936]], 71).

Despite the fact that Mannheim's paradox pointed to a problem of cognition that was no longer new, the problem has not gone away and is unlikely ever to disappear. The problem of the disinterested observer is implicitly embedded in the phenomenon of cognition itself and constitutes its foundational basis. The more interesting it is for us to propose new ways of solving it. The interest of such solutions lies mainly in the fact that from these new solutions new useful methodologies may well grow. In this essay, I would like to present a solution that combines the phenomenological approach of Husserl with the late philosophy of Wittgenstein.

## Husserl’s Phenomenology of the Particular World
1. The [[world (Husserl)|world]] is synonymous with the [[life-world (Husserl)|life-world]] and the [[experienced world|experienced world]].
	- We can use these concepts interchangeably. It is assumed that the difference between them is the difference in the shading of the concept of the world itself. Life-world is used in the context of the world's opposition to the objectivism of modern sciences (e.g., [[@mensch2017|Mensch 2017]]); experienced world is often used in the sense of [[perceptual world|perceptual world]] (e.g., [[@geniusas2012|Geniusas 2012]], 195-208).
2. The world is a multidimensional sense-formation ([[@sowa2008|Sowa 2008]], LXI; see also [[@lee2019|Lee 2019]], 49-50).
	- We can distinguish [[transcendental concept of the world|transcendental]] and [[natural concept of the world|natural]] senses of the world; concern it as the [[world as totality|totality]] or as the [[world-horizon|horizon]]; take it in general or differentiate its [[perceptual world|perceptual]] and [[cultural world|cultural]] layers. [[Husserl|Husserl’s]] [[phenomenology|phenomenology]] expresses the  plurality of our understandings of the world.
3. There is a plurality of [[particular world|particular worlds]].
	- One way of understanding the world is to consider it in terms of the plurality of the particular or relative worlds. We are always inhabit the interweaving of the particular worlds: economic world, scientist-world, historical world, student-world, Russian-world, etc. These worlds are characterized by their own [[horizon|horizons]] of beliefs, practices, customs, traditions and other figures of horizonal relatedness, such as valuableness or meaningfulness.
	- On the first sight the phenomenon of the particular worlds can be best understood as the relativistic plurality of cultural worlds with their own truths and blind spots.
4. There is a distinction between concrete, typical and essential kinds of particular worlds.
	- All concretely considered particular worlds are intertwined. An economic world is never a pure world of economic [[horizon|horizons]]. It is intertwined with the children's, commercial, architectural, scholarly, and other particular worlds. In the logic of concreteness there is no the “economic world” but the “Russian-middle-class-student-atheistic-militant-economic-world” among other concrete economic worlds shared by [[community (Husserl)|communities]]. The extreme point of concretization would be the complete blurring of the boundaries between particular worlds and the establishment of a radical [[relativism|relativistic perspective]], in which there is only my one and only unique world.
	- Every particular world is a [[type|typical]] world to. We grasp it and are able to explicate it in its typical properties and horizons cut off from other particular worlds. This allows us to speak of particular worlds as common to a set of other particular worlds (on the concept of type in Husserl’s phenomenology see, e.g., [[@lohmar2003|Lohmar 2003]], [[@schutz1966b|Schutz 1966]]).
	- Every particular world has its [[essence (Husserl)|essence]] (/essential structure /eidos /eidetical structure), i.e. a set of properties and rules that are true for any (including potential) selected concrete particular world. We can speak both of the essence of “the” particular world itself and of the essence of “a” particular world (economic world, military world, and so on) – the essence of the first embraces the essence of the second (on the concept of essence in Husserl’s phenomenology see, e.g., [[@sowa2010|Sowa 2010]], [[@majolino2015|Majolino 2015]]).
5. There is a distinction between the [[the one world|world as such]] and the plurality of the [[particular world|particular worlds]].
	- The postulate of [[natural attitude|natural attitude]] presupposes that every our action directed toward things, deeds, plans, and concerns, conceals the [[horizon (Husserl)|horizons]] through which any directionality becomes possible at all. The [[situation|situation]] itself and the structure of [[habituality (Husserl)|habitualities]] must stay in the background so that we are able to deal with the foreground. Of course, sometimes the background reveals itself: we notice that “we are in an awkward situation”, that “it is only our opinion”, that “we are in a wrong place“. But the key achievement of the natural attitude is that when we notice the background, we immediately change this noticing on the new interpretation, on the new foreground. Our experience stays [[concordance|concordant]] and unanimous. Yes, we misunderstood the situation, we misunderstood the state of affairs. But the break of the situation does not lead to the breaking of the whole world: I am still a human being in the world, I still stay on their own two feet. The natural attitude presupposes the unthematizable and uninterrupted world as [[the one world|the one world]], as an all-encompassing [[universal horizon|universal horizon]] in which all our particular horizons are nested and change each other.
6. The one world could be thematized through the break of the natural attitude / The one world could be thematized through the institution of the philosophical (theoretical) attitude (e.g., [[@held2012|Held 2012]], 450; [[@miettinen2015|Miettinen 2015]], 243).
	- The [[philosophical attitude|philosophical attitude]] first established by [[Heraclitus|Heraclitus]] allows us to break this spell of naturalness, to cast off the shackles of confinement in the particular worlds and to [[thematization|thematize]] the world as [[the one world|the one world]]. [[philosophy|Philosophy]] makes it possible for the first time to grasp the world as our “common” world, to institute and [[episteme|episteme]] and to distinguish it from the plurality of the doxa.
7. Theoretical attitude opens up an infinite horizon of universal truths.
	- Living in a [[natural attitude|natural attitude]], I live according to certain sets of beliefs and opinions. However, they can be disappointed ([[@luft1998|Luft 1998]], 161). The belief that a stick is straight disappoints when we put it in water and it bends is a simple example of revealing the dogmatic nature of some everyday beliefs. Here we see the origin of the episteme, science, in the primary, basic sense as the desire to establish what things “really” are. I want to know the “real” being of things, and not just what I know about them according to the opinions I have acquired. I want to move from subjective to objective truths, from the relative to the absolute, from [[doxa|doxa]] to episteme. At the same time, the implementation of any science is possible through the acquisition of a certain position - a position that will allow one to distance oneself from the natural everyday life. This position allows us to take a [[theoretical attitude|theoretical attitude]]. In the theoretical attitude, the researcher “turns away from all practical interests and, within the closed sphere of his own cognitive activity, strives for theory” ([[@husserl1954|Hua VI]], 331). [[Husserl|Husserl]] defines a theoretical observer who has taken a theoretical attitude as a “disinterested spectator” ([[@husserl1954|Hua VI]], 328, 34; [[@husserl1959|Hua VIII]], 98), as a person who makes detachment from practical activity his virtue. I can look at the house in terms of “aesthetic” and “architectural” attitudes. Both attitudes are “true” within their own logics, but not in relation to each other. In fact, it doesn't even make sense to oppose them to each other. In the scientific attitude, I suspend all these opinions and local truths. The positions of the sciences, in contrast to the positions of other natural attitudes, claim to be absolute truth; not to be limited by the particular worlds - any person from any particular world should understand mathematics.
8. Any science (knowledge) is rooted in doxa.
	- The theoretical attitude that allows the scientist to distance himself from the particular world and opens the horizon of universal truths to him, at the same time reveals the true meaning of this universality. The position of the “disinterested observer” taken by the scientist (and philosopher), which is found both in the movement of phenomenology and in the development of the social sciences, in fact does not make him an absolutely disinterested, does not completely rid him of naivety. All the truths asserted by a scientist (and philosopher) are necessarily relative, since the activity of a scientist (and philosopher) is an activity based on [[tradition|tradition]]. Science “can never simply overcome [[doxa|doxa]], leave it ‘behind the back’, since it itself is rooted in doxa, in the [[life-world|life-world]]” ([[@yudin2012|Юдин 2012]], 165). Moreover, scientific activity itself turns out to be historical, that is, it can also become doxic.
	- This thesis, in fact, confirms Mannheim's assertion that all social knowledge is subject to distortions of ideology. But phenomenological reasoning does more than this. It shows that any knowledge in general is rooted in doxa. Science grows out of the natural attitude. And its movement is teleological – the telos of this movement is the realm of universal truths free from doxa. This realm is established as a formal ideal, the movement towards which is endless. Science institutes itself as an endless enterprise to free humanity from the truths and beliefs of particular worlds. In other words, phenomenological reasoning, although it makes Mannheim's statement true, turns it from a paradox into a task. Yes, all knowledge is influenced by ideologies. But the direct task of the scientist is to eradicate this influence. Yes, we remain prisoners of our particular worlds. But science establishes itself as an endless overcoming of this imprisonment. 


## Wittgenstein’s Philosophy of the Form of Life
9. [[form of life (Wittgenstein)|Form of life]] is a set of practices and actions that comprise the matrix within which a given [[language|language]] has meaning (see [[@moyal-sharrock2015|Moyal-Sharrock 2015]], 25; [[@gonzalez-castan2016|González-Castán 2016]], 123).
10. There is a distinction between “the” form of life and “a” form of life.
	- Wittgenstein used the notion of a form of life in both the singular and the plural, which has given rise to a large body of research secondary literature on the subject matter. The general division into singular and plural use of a form of life implies, on the one hand, the relativization of a multitude of culturally distinct forms of life, in which any truth and supposed state of affairs can only be valid from the point of view of this particular form of life, and, on the other hand, human form of life as such, which is valid for any culture.
11. Let “the” form of life be called “[[human form of life|human form of life]]” and “a” form of life be called “[[form of human life|form of human life]]”.
12. Human form of life consists of such basic [[practice|practices]] that are rooted in man's biological and social nature and occur in all cultures (e.g., [[@saari2005|Saari 2005]], 141).
	- Human form of life is “the common behaviour of mankind”, the basic “regular ways of acting” ([[@wittgenstein1993|Wittgenstein 1993]], 397) shared by all human beings and all cultures ([[@moyal-sharrock2015|Moyal-Sharrock 2015]], 34; [[@thompson2010|Thompson 2010]], 102-103). It constitutes the bedrock of any understanding and making sense in human being’s life. Human form of life is not something that can be justified. On the contrary, it is taken as given in order to justify our practices and beliefs. “The” form of life “is what has to be accepted”, argues Wittgenstein ([[@wittgenstein2009|Wittgenstein 2009]], 244-245). It means that we cannot choose to engage or not to engage in these fundamental practices that are constitutive of human life ([[@saari2005|Saari 2005]], 142). Such practices as eating, walking, drinking, playing, talking, chatting, questioning, helping, greeting, making moral judgements and punishing those who break the norms of their society, taking care of children, burying the dead – and much more – constitute the human form of life (e.g., [[@wittgenstein2009|Wittgenstein 2009]], § 25; [[@wittgenstein1998|Wittgenstein 1998–2000]], Item 165, 110). 
13. Human form of life provides the system of reference of the humanity.
	- Human form of life provides a foundation for the understanding of beliefs, practices, uses of language, institutes in a foreign culture. “The common behaviour of mankind is the system of reference by means of which we interpret an unknown language” ([[@wittgenstein2009|Wittgenstein 2009]] § 206).
14. Human form of life is fundamentally socio-cultural ([[@moyal-sharrock2015|Moyal-Sharrock 2015]], 33).
	- There is no pre-cultural level of the human form of life: cultural and natural are mutually absorbed ([[@cavell1996|Cavell 1996]], 330). Human being is irreducibly social and natural. Human form of life is characterized by the [[universal customs|universal customs]]. Language is the second nature we all share ([[@moyal-sharrock2015|Moyal-Sharrock 2015]], 30).
	- “It is impossible to superimpose on man a lower layer of behaviour which one chooses to call ‘natural’, followed by a manufactured cultural or spiritual world. Everything is both manufactured and natural in man, as it were, in the sense that there is not a word, not a form of behaviour which does not owe something to purely biological being – and which at the same time does not elude the simplicity of animal life, and cause forms of vital behaviour to deviate from their pre-ordained direction, through a sort of leakage and through a genius for ambiguity which might serve to define man.” ([[@merleau-ponty2012|Merleau-Ponty 2012]], 220)
	- That is why Whiting's interpretation, which divides the form of life into vertical (biological) and horizontal (ethnological) (see [[@whiting2017|Whiting 2017]], 424), seems to us to miss an important premise of the duality of human essence.
15. “A” form of life is a [[modification of the world|modification]] of “the” form of life (e.g., [[@thompson2010|Thompson 2010]], 105; [[@moyal-sharrock2015|Moyal-Sharrock 2015]], 33).
	- The ways in which the basic activities and practices of the human form of life carried on vary considerably from one culture to another ([[@saari2005|Saari 2005]], 146). It is supposed that geographical and historical circumstances determine the variation in the way how these foundational practices are realized. But forms of human life are constituted not only through the natural history of mankind. They are such practices and activities that are only indirectly related to human form of life.
16. Form of human life can be identified with the typical particular world (see no.4).
	- ”The concept of “form of human life” allows us to deal with pluralities of forms of life and [[cultural relativism|cultural relativism]] ([[@thompson2010|Thompson 2010]], 98). ==дописать==
17. Other cultures are not utterly foreign to social scientists, for they encounter many beliefs, practices and institutions that natives share with them (e.g., [[@saari2005|Saari 2005]], 153-155).
	- Basic practices and general natural history give the social scientists a foothold when trying to understand foreign forms of life. For example, when the anthropologists see mothers taking care of their children, tribesmen building shelters for themselves and greeting each other, they take it as a basis for understanding natives’ specific practices and the language itself. Even if anthropologists "cannot yet speak the natives’ language, they “understand the point of their basic activities and practices” ([[@saari2005|Saari 2005]], 146).
	- Since [[language-game (Wittgenstein)|language-games]] are bound-up with the non-linguistic behaviour, since the [[language (Wittgenstein)|language]] functions within the active, practical lives of speakers (e.g., [[@mcginn2013|McGinn 2013]], 47), native’s self-desctiptions and their understanding of the surrounding world are available for social scientists through the publicly accessible practices. Through training and learning, the social scientist can come to understanding of the concepts of the foreign world. “If a person has not yet got the concepts, I shall teach him to use the words by means of examples and by practice” ([[@wittgenstein2009|Wittgenstein 2009]], § 208).
18. [[human form of life|Human form of life]] is the foundation for understanding the alien [[form of human life|form of human life]].
	- This is how [[Husserl|Husserl]] describes his experience in China: “The individual type is not completely known to me: a plant, but a strange sort, a field, but full of plants that are unfamiliar to me. The work on the field: I do not figure out their typical way to cultivate the land. A house is built in alien ways. Is it a temple, or is it a building of the government? I am in China, on the market trade and traffic, but in an alien way. I do know that they have their own typification, but I have no knowledge of them; somehow there are people there in the market.” ([[@husserl2008|Hua XXXIX]], 159).
	- The key theme of this description, which leads us to Wittgenstein's insight, is that Husserl, in describing his misunderstanding, still grasps the basic practices of the foreign life-form. The human form of life is such a form that will be understood (and will serve as a basis of appropriation) in every encounter with the Other and the Foreign (be it a culture, a country, an institution, etc.).
	- Wittgenstein's reasoning tells us that Mannheim's paradox does not take into account that the ideology of the Other is something that I can understand in principle, since ideology is constitutive of every subjectivity (including the [[community (Husserl)|We-subjectivity]]). If the Other and I differed so much that I could not make objective statements about him, I could not claim that he had any ideology at all, so alien would he be to me.


## Conclusion




## Literature
- [[@yudin2012|Юдин Г.Б. 2012. Феноменологическая редукция в эпистемологии социальной науки. Национальный Исследовательский Университет “Высшая Школа Экономики”.]]
- [[@cavell1996|Cavell S. 1996. Declining Decline // The Cavell Reader. Oxford: Blackwell.]]
- [[@geertz1973|Geertz Clifford. 1973. Ideology As a Cultural System // The interpretation of cultures. New York: Basic books.]]
- [[@geniusas2012|Geniusas S. 2012. The Origins of the Horizon in Husserl’s Phenomenology. Dordrecht: Springer.]]
- [[@gonzalez-castan2016|González-Castán O.L. 2016. Structures, Dynamisms and Contents of Our Belief System: Husserl and Wittgenstein // Action, Decision-Making and Forms of Life.]]
- [[@held2012|Held K. 2012. Towards a phenomenology of the political world // The Oxford Handbook of Contemporary Phenomenology, 442-459. Oxford University Press.]]
- [[@husserl1954|Husserl E. (Hua VI). 1954. Die Krisis der europäischen Wissenschaften und die transzendentale Phänomenologie. Den Haag: Martinus Nijhoff.]]
- [[@husserl1959|Husserl E. (Hua VIII). 1959. Erste Philosophie II (1923-24): Theorie der phänomenologischen Reduktion. Den Haag: Martinus Nijhoff.]]
- [[@husserl2008|Husserl E. (Hua XXXIX). 2008. Die Lebenswelt: Auslegungen der vorgegebenen Welt und ihrer Konstitution. Dordrecht: Springer.]]
- [[@lee2019|Lee N.-I. 2019. The Pluralistic Concept of the Life-World and the Various Fields of the Phenomenology of the Life-World // Husserl Husserl Studies 36 (1).]]
- [[@lohmar2003|Lohmar D. 2003. Husserl’s Type and Kant’s Schemata: Systematic Reasons for Their Correlation or Identity // The new Husserl: A Critical Reader. Indiana University Press]]
- [[@luft1998|Luft S. 1998. Husserl's phenomenological discovery of the natural attitude // Continental Philosophy Review 31(2).]]
- [[@majolino2015|Majolino C. 2015. Individuum and Region of Being: On the Unifying Principle of Husserl’s ‘Headless’ Ontology // Commentary on Husserl’s Ideas I. Berlin: De Gruyter.]]
- [[@mannheim1936|Mannheim K. 1936. Ideology and Utopia: An Introduction to the Sociology of Knowledge. London: Routledge.]]
- [[@mcginn2013|McGinn M. 2013. The Routledge Guidebook to Wittgenstein's Philosophical investigations. London & New York:  Routledge.]]
- [[@mensch2017|Mensch J. 2017. Life and the Reduction to the Life-World // Horizon. Феноменологические исследования 6(3).]]
- [[@merleau-ponty2012|Merleau-Ponty M. 2012. Phenomenology of perception. London: Routledge. ]]
- [[@miettinen2015|Miettinen T. 2015. Phenomenology and political idealism // Continental Philosophy Review 48(2): 237-253.]]
- [[@moyal-sharrock2015|Moyal-Sharrock D. 2015. Wittgenstein on forms of life, patterns of life, and ways of living // Nordic Wittgenstein Review.]]
- [[@saari2005|Saari H. 2005. Wittgenstein on Understanding Other Cultures // Grazer Philosophische Studien 68: 139–161.]]
- [[@schutz1966b|Schutz A. 1966. Type and Eidos in Husserl’s Late Philosophy // Collected papers III. Studies in phenomenological philosophy. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.]]
- [[@sowa2008|Sowa R. 2008. Einleitung des Herausgebers // Die Lebenswelt: Auslegungen der vorgegebenen Welt und ihrer Konstitution. Dordrecht: Springer.]]
- [[@sowa2010|Sowa R. 2010. Husserls Idee einer nicht-empirischen Wissenschaft von der Lebenswelt // Husserl Studies 26(1).]]
- [[@thompson2010|Thompson J.M. 2010. Translating Form(s)-of-life? Remarks on Cultural Difference and Alterity // Wittgenstein on Forms of Life and the Nature of Experience. Peter Lang.]]
- [[@whiting2017|Whiting D. 2017. Languages, Language-Games, and Forms of Life // A Companion to Wittgenstein, 420-432. John Wiley & Sons.]]
- [[@wittgenstein1993|Wittgenstein L. 1993. Cause and Effect: Intuitive Awareness // Philosophical Occasions: 1912-1951. Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing.]]
- [[@wittgenstein1998|Wittgenstein L. 1998–2000. Wittgenstein’s Nachlass. The Bergen Electronic Edition. Bergen.]]
- [[@wittgenstein2009|Wittgenstein L. 2009. Philosophical Investigations. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.]]
