---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/220616-essay-political-as-the-figure-of-otherness/","dgHomeLink":false,"dgPassFrontmatter":false}
---

# Political as a Figure of Otherness

## 1. Introduction
There is a peculiar gap in the few politically sophisticated phenomenological literature focused on Husserl's methodology. It describes only the institution event of the political in the historical movement of the community, but not its essential structure and its place in subject’s and community’s experience. Meanwhile, it is these two themes that are most important in the phenomenological approach. [[ontology of the life-world|Ontology of the life-world]], which describes the invariant structure of the [[phenomenon|phenomenon]] under study, and [[transcendental archeology|transcendental archeology]], which reveals the passive genesis of this phenomenon, are the two of the three main methods presented by the late Husserl (where the third one is the [[phenomenological metaphysics|phenomenological metaphysics]]) (see [[@chernavin2011|Chernavin 2011]]). In other words, modern phenomenologists are concerned only with the [[active genesis|active genesis]] of the political world, missing the more fundamental aspects of its phenomenality.

We find a helpful intuition for the development of  phenomenological investigation in the existential reading of [[Schmitt|Schmitt's]] *The Concept of the Political*. In Schmitt's existential interpretation, the [[political|political]] is based on such a [[friend-enemy distinction (Schmitt)|distinction between friend and enemy]], which, firstly, reveals the essence of the political as a co-encounter of communities’ [[way of life (Schmitt)|ways of life]] and, secondly, presents the [[enemy (Schmitt)|enemy]] as my own constitutive condition, as an existential question to myself, as a call to my own perspective. Schmitt's reasoning allows us to fill simultaneously the eidetic and archeological gaps of the phenomenological explication.

The result of applying this intuition is the consideration of the political as one of the teleological inaugurations in the passive and active genesis of (inter-)subjectivity. In my (and communal) teleological movement, the radical otherness, which is the core of any experience, necessarily becomes a political horizon encompassing co-encountering with each other particular worlds and constituting this co-encounter itself. The political appears as a figure of otherness.

In the first part of the essay, I will consider the phenomenological approach to the thematization of the political and formulate its insufficiency for ontological and archeological research. In the second part, I will introduce Schmitt's basic distinctions with the aim of discovering in them an ontology of the political world that complements the phenomenological thematization. In the third part, I will turn to a radical reading of Schmitt's enemy as alien, as the alienated core of any experience in general. If such a reading is successful, we will be able to argue that these three sections represent peculiar constitutive levels of the political, in which radical otherness is its most fundamental category.


## 2. Phenomenality of the Political World
1. The [[world (Husserl)|world]] (Welt) is synonymous with the [[life-world (Husserl)|life-world]] (Lebenswelt) and the [[experienced world|experienced world]] (Erfahrungswelt).
	- We can use these concepts interchangeably. It is assumed that the difference between them is the difference in the shading of the concept of the world itself. Life-world is used in the context of the world's opposition to the objectivism of modern sciences (e.g., [[@mensch2017|Mensch 2017]]); experienced world is often used in the sense of [[perceptual world|perceptual world]] (e.g., [[@geniusas2012|Geniusas 2012]], 195-208).
2. The world is a multidimensional sense-formation (multidimensionales Sinngebilde) ([[@sowa2008|Sowa 2008]], LXI; see also [[@lee2019|Lee 2019]], 49-50).
	- We can distinguish [[transcendental concept of the world|transcendental]] and [[natural concept of the world|natural]] senses of the world; concern it as the [[world as totality|totality]] or as the [[world-horizon|horizon]]; take it in general or differentiate its [[perceptual world|perceptual]] and [[cultural world|cultural]] layers. [[Husserl|Husserl’s]] [[phenomenology|phenomenology]] expresses the  plurality of our understandings of the world.
3. There is a plurality of [[particular world|particular worlds]].
	- One way of understanding the world is to consider it in terms of the plurality of the particular or relative worlds. We are always inhabit the interweaving of the particular worlds: economic world, scientist-world, historical world, student-world, Russian-world, etc. These worlds are characterized by their own [[horizon|horizons]] of beliefs, practices, customs, traditions and other figures of horizonal relatedness, such as valuableness or meaningfulness.
	- On the first sight the phenomenon of the particular worlds can be best understood as the relativistic plurality of cultural worlds with their own truths and blind spots.
4. There is a distinction between concrete, typical and essential kinds of particular worlds.
	- All concretely considered particular worlds are intertwined. An economic world is never a pure world of economic [[horizon|horizons]]. It is intertwined with the children's, commercial, architectural, scholarly, and other particular worlds. In the logic of concreteness there is no the “economic world” but the “Russian-middle-class-student-atheistic-militant-economic-world” among other concrete economic worlds shared by [[community (Husserl)|communities]]. The extreme point of concretization would be the complete blurring of the boundaries between particular worlds and the establishment of a radical [[relativism|relativistic perspective]], in which there is only my one and only unique world.
	- Every particular world is a [[type|typical]] world to. We grasp it and are able to explicate it in its typical properties and horizons cut off from other particular worlds. This allows us to speak of particular worlds as common to a set of other particular worlds (on the concept of type in Husserl’s phenomenology see, e.g., [[@lohmar2003|Lohmar 2003]], [[@schutz1966b|Schutz 1966]]).
	- Every particular world has its [[essence (Husserl)|essence]] (/essential structure /eidos /eidetical structure), i.e. a set of properties and rules that are true for any (including potential) selected concrete particular world. We can speak both of the essence of “the” particular world itself and of the essence of “a” particular world (economic world, military world, and so on) – the essence of the first embraces the essence of the second (on the concept of essence in Husserl’s phenomenology see, e.g., [[@sowa2010|Sowa 2010]], [[@majolino2015|Majolino 2015]]).
5. There is a [[political world|political world]].
6. Political world should have its concrete, typical and essential forms.
7. Political world should have its own way of [[appearance|appearance]] and [[thematization|thematization]].
	- And therefore an [[ontology of the life-world|ontology of the political world]] is possible.
8.  Klaus Held and some other phenomenologists working according to [[Husserl|Husserl’s]] methodology suggest the way of disclosing the [[phenomenon|phenomenon]] of the [[political world|political world]] that is presented in no. 9-15 (see [[@depraz1995a|Depraz 1995]]; [[@held2012|Held 2012]]; [[@drummond2000|Drummond 2000]]; [[@miettinen2015|Miettinen 2015]]; [[@miettinen2020|Miettinen 2020]], 83-135):
9. There is a distinction between the [[the one world|world as such]] and the plurality of the [[particular world|particular worlds]].
	- The postulate of [[natural attitude|natural attitude]] presupposes that every our action directed toward things, deeds, plans, and concerns, conceals the [[horizon (Husserl)|horizons]] through which any directionality becomes possible at all. The [[situation|situation]] itself and the structure of [[habituality (Husserl)|habitualities]] must stay in the background so that we are able to deal with the foreground. Of course, sometimes the background reveals itself: we notice that “we are in an awkward situation”, that “it is only our opinion”, that “we are in a wrong place“. But the key achievement of the natural attitude is that when we notice the background, we immediately change this noticing on the new interpretation, on the new foreground. Our experience stays [[concordance|concordant]] and unanimous. Yes, we misunderstood the situation, we misunderstood the state of affairs. But the break of the situation does not lead to the breaking of the whole world: I am still a human being in the world, I still stay on their own two feet. The natural attitude presupposes the unthematizable and uninterrupted world as [[the one world|the one world]], as an all-encompassing [[universal horizon|universal horizon]] in which all our particular horizons are nested and change each other.
10. The one world could be thematized through the break of the natural attitude / The one world could be thematized through the institution of the philosophical attitude.
	- The [[philosophical attitude|philosophical attitude]] first established by [[Heraclitus|Heraclitus]] allows us to break this spell of naturalness, to cast off the shackles of confinement in the particular worlds and to [[thematization|thematize]] the world as [[the one world|the one world]]. [[philosophy|Philosophy]] makes it possible for the first time to grasp the world as our “common” world, to institute and [[episteme|episteme]] and to distinguish it from the plurality of the doxa.
11. Because the philosophical attitude exists, there should be its condition of possibility.
	- The institution of the philosophical attitude does not come from nothing. If it is possible at all, then we must have a possibility of temporally removing the spell of doxa; we are not the eternal prisoners of our particular horizons. Because there is an [[episteme|episteme]], there must be some world-open form of doxa, which is not yet episteme. There should be a “mediator” between doxa and episteme as opposed to a [[doxa|doxa]].
12. We have an ability to thematize our own absorption by doxa and have an awareness of the [[the other|others']] [[horizon|horizons]].
	- We know that there particular worlds to which we do not belong and which we hardly even understand. Even so, we are still aware that they exist, that they presuppose their own horizons of significance, practices and beliefs. And we are able to learn to understand them.
13. In order to be thematizable the other particular world should present itself / The co-presence of the other particular world is the condition of its thematization.
14. Phenomenologists suppose that the political world was inaugurated as a “free-space” of the world-open opinions’ exchange.
	- Held claims that the political originated as “a new form of communal life” when the Greek polis became a [[democracy|democracy]] ([[@held2012|Held 2012]], 453). When the “many” recognized each other as a citizens, when they discovered a common interest and right for public speech, they inaugurated a “free-space” for the co-encountering of the particular worlds. “The political world”, writes Held, “is nothing other than the correlate of the many opinions that open up this living-space” ([[@held2012|Held 2012]], 454).
15. Political world is a mediator between the natural attitude and the philosophical attitude.
	- When the political world is inaugurated, the community takes a step towards the establishment of the [[horizon|horizon]] of the common world, in the line of the episteme. In the consciousness of the political world, the consciousness of its participants as “one and the same”, possessing a single world, is established.
16. There is a possibility of radicalization of no. 14.
	- Although no. 14, I suppose that the political world is not necessarily connected with the institution of the “free-space” of discussion. The Held reasoning just gets stuck on the “political space” of discussing one’s own horizons. I suppose that there should be a possibility of radicalization of no. 14, that there is more fundamental level of the political.
	- And we actually can find a hint for this possibility within the contemporary phenomenological discourse. Timo Miettinen argues that [[theoretical attitude|theoretical attitude]] and [[philosophy|philosophy]] itself originated from the Greek practice of *theoria*, that is a “kind of anthropological field of study or ‘travelogue’ that aimed at providing information on the beliefs and practices of individual city states” ([[@miettinen2015|Miettinen 2015]], 243). And if we compare no. 14-15 and Timo's reasoning, we see the following parallel. Although Miettinen does not write of the inauguration of the political, it is easy to assume that in case of his reasoning, this inauguration would be connected not with relations within the state, but with relations between many states. Therefore, the political world is not connected with the state as such. Rather, it should be associated with the otherness, with the collision of alien particular worlds.
17. Political world is a horizon of co-encounter of the totality of particular worlds.
	- The radicalization of no. 14 is the consideration of the political as the horizon of otherness, of alienation, of another ways of life that questions our own particular worlds.
	- The political world must be analyzed as a horizon of [[alien-world|foreign-worlds]] that we encounter. Modern phenomenological theory, as we see in Held’s work, does not offer us the necessary tools for this. But we actually can find this analysis in existential-political interpretation of Carl Schmitt’s philosophy.


## 3. Ontology of the Political World
18. Schmitt’s conceptualization of the political can be interpreted as the thematization of the more fundamental level of the political world, then in no. 14-15.
	- What could interest us in Held’s phenomenological explication of the political is first of all the consideration of the political as a collision of particular worlds. Held speaks of this encounter as the discovery of a “political space” in which the particular worlds from just co-present become mutually negotiable. But can we radicalize this position? Can we discover an even more fundamental essence of the political that would underlie Held's description? I believe that by turning to the works of Schmitt, we can indeed make such a move.
19. No. 20-25 are preliminary remarks where no. 20-22 are Schmitt’s theses and no. 23-25 are additions to them that binds Schmitt’s philosophy to the phenomenological reasoning more closely.
20. [[Schmitt|Schmitt]] argues that the enemy is solely the public enemy ([[@schmitt2008|Schmitt 2008]], 28) and that a private person has no political enemies ([[@schmitt2008|Schmitt 2008]], 51).
21. Schmitt argues that there is a [[way of life (Schmitt)|way of life]] (/form of existence) which I share with my community ([[@schmitt2008|Schmitt 2008]], 27ff.).
22. Schmitt claims that the [[political (Schmitt)|political]] is not a domain (/sphere /substance) ([[@schmitt2008|Schmitt 2008]], 38).
	- Schmitt proposes to view the political not as “other” domains but as a form or a structure of their interrelations (see no. 26).
23. The way of life is identical with the concrete [[particular world|particular world]].
	- See no. 4. It could also be equated with many other synonymous concepts in other philosophical systems. For example, with the [[form of human life|forms of human life]] in [[Wittgenstein|Wittgenstein’s]] philosophy.
24. The political as the non-substantial antithesis is identical with the [[essence (Husserl)|essence]] of the political world as a particular world.
	- The political world as in the statement no. 22 can be considered through the conceptual framework of [[essence (Husserl)|essence]] and [[eidetic reduction|eidetic reduction]] in [[Husserl|Husserl’s]] [[phenomenology|phenomenology]]. The formal representation of the political in Schmitt’s philosophy could also be applied to many other particular worlds. For example, a [[historical world|historical world]] can also be considered, on the one hand, as a concrete historical horizon of a culture and, on the other hand, as the essential structure of any concrete particular world. Non-substantially considered [[history|history]] is, roughly speaking, a [[horizon|horizon]] of preservation, “passing forward” and appropriation of community’s sense-formations. And such a representation of the historical world is parallel to Schmitt's non-substantial representation of the political.
	- Just like the political world, – which is not the constant structure of the communities (e.g., [[@schmitt2008|Schmitt 2008]], 35, 39), – the historical world is the [[historical a priori (Husserl)|historical a priori]] which, paradoxically, has its own act of [[primal institution|primal institution]]. There should be a point and place in the history of [[community (Husserl)|community]] when the historical (and political) as such was inaugurated. There could be (and actually were) communities that know no history (e.g., [[@moran2011|Moran 2011]], 466f.).
25. The [[enemy (Schmitt)|enemy]] is not only the group’s enemy, but also the enemy for me-as-a-member-of-the-group.
	-  Of course, by the thesis “the enemy is solely the public enemy” Schmitt highlights significant difference between the *hostis* and the *inimicus*. But on the other hand, as a member of the group, I am also involved in the confrontation with the enemy. He is an enemy of the particular world which I also share with my friends.
26. The [[political (Schmitt)|political]] in [[Schmitt|Schmitt’s]] philosophy describes “the intensity of an association or dissociation of human beings” ([[@schmitt2008|Schmitt 2008]], 38).
	 - The political consist of the degree of intensity at which other spheres are politicized ([[@sartori1989|Sartori 1989]], 65). “Political questions cannot be dealt with only politically” ([[@marder2010|Marder 2010]], 96). Every sphere is potentially political due to a possible increase in the intensities of association and dissociation structuring it ([[@marder2010|Marder 2010]], 65).
27. The utmost degree of intensity of an association or dissociation is denoted by the [[friend-enemy distinction (Schmitt)|friend-enemy criterion]] ([[@schmitt2008|Schmitt 2008]], 26).
	- And the greater the intensity of antagonism between the groups, the stronger this distinction. As the presence of the political determines through possibility (namely, through the possibility of [[war (Schmitt)|war]]), so too the enemy as a potential enemy is always present in the dissociation between the groups.
28. The friend-enemy distinction is the foundation of the political itself / The friend-enemy distinction constitutes the political ([[@marder2010|Marder 2010]], 87).
29. The [[enemy (Schmitt)|enemy]] is the one who is able to destroy my way of life (see [[@schmitt2008|Schmitt 2008]], 49; see also [[@norris1998|Norris 1998]], 75-76).
	- The confrontation between groups is based not on their pure co-presence but on the radical otherness of their ways of life. The other way of life that is strange to me, can be destructive for my own particular world. 
30. The enemy is the one who existentially puts me in question ([[@marder2010|Marder 2010]], 87-88).
	- The possibility of destroying my way of life necessarily calls it into question. Moreover, this question is meant in an existential sense – in the sense of a call for establishment and thematization of one's own horizons. What way of life does my enemy potentially destroy? Is this way of life worth defending? The enemy is defined by this very act of questioning. He doles out my [[identity|identity]] to me by this very act ([[@marder2010|Marder 2010]], 88). 
31. Compared to no. 9-15 reasoning, which only thematizes the political and allows it to be noticed, Schmitt's philosophy describes its essential structure.
32. The essence of the political world is the intensity of antagonism between the [[home-world|home-world]] and the [[alien-world|foreign-world]].


## 4. Transcendental Archeology of the Political World
33. Although no. 20, Schmitt also claims that the [[enemy (Schmitt)|enemy]] is *my own* question ([[@schmitt1991|Schmitt 1991]], 243; [[@schmitt2002|Schmitt 2002]], 89-90).
	- The enemy “is the other, the stranger”, that he is “existentially something different and alien” ([[@schmitt2008|Schmitt 2008]], 27).
34. No. 34 contradicts 20.
	- No. 20 presupposes that the enemy can question me only as the member of the community with an intersubjectively shared way of life. But in no. 34 there is no any community. I suppose that in order to prevent the contradiction we should make the following move.
35. In order to prevent no. 34 we should differentiate two concepts of the enemy: the enemy as the community’s enemy and the enemy as [[the alien|the alien]].
	- It is a distinction between the enemy as a bearer of horizons that unfamiliar to me and call into question my own way of life and the enemy as a radical alienness within me, by virtue of which I, – as a subject with my own perspective, – am possible at all.
36. The enemy as the alien can be thematized through its differentiation with the other.
37. There is a distinction between [[the other|the other]] and [[the alien|the alien]]: while the other is the “second” ego, the alien represents “not me” or “foreign to me”.
	- The other as “the second” is dependent upon the first and grounded in the first ([[@steinbock1995|Steinbock 1995]], 59). The other is the other self; the other is possible only insofar as I am; I am a condition of the possibility of the other – it is typical Cartesian perspective that is presented in Husserl’s Meditations ([[@husserl1950|Hua I]]). At the same time, the alien is someone (something) that cannot be after me. It is someone through which I find myself as “my own perspective”. 
38. The alien is a prototype of any difference ([[@marder2010|Marder 2010]], 87).
	-  The alien accomplishes the real work of heteronomy, unhinging and maintaining undone the figure of the human conceived as “an open question” ([[@marder2010|Marder 2010]], 87). The alien is a mechanism of distantiation (including self-distantiation).
39. The alien is the essential structure of the [[subject|subjectivity]] itself and it’s [[experience|experience]].
	- The alien as the [[primal fact|primal fact]] of our experience creates “the perspective” as such. Perspective is a view that differs from the alien view. The alien calls to me as my own perspective which “differs”. The alien is a part of me as calling a question to myself; it is me asking myself a question.
40. (Since no. 39,) The alien is the [[constitution (Husserl)|constitutional foundation]] of the enemy.
	- In order to no. 21 and no. 29 be valid, I have to have “my own” way of life. But in order to have "my own" way of life, “my” experience must have the property [[mineness|mineness]], which is possible only because there is the alienness within the [[experience|experience]].
41. (Since no. 39,) The alien is the constitutional foundation of the particular world itself and the antagonism between the particular worlds.
	- The particular world is an intersubjective world which unites a plurality of perspectives. According to the reasoning no. 39, the particular world and the plurality of the particular worlds are possible because there is an alien creating the distinction between the perspectives itself.


## 5. Conclusion
In this essay, I proceeded from the “fact” that Hannah Arendt is not included in modern political phenomenology. But this, of course, is not the case. The phenomenological study of the political cannot exist without her significant contribution, even though she did not classify her work as phenomenological. The inclusion of Arendt in the essay also means the inclusion of a large body of literature that argues for fundamental differences in Arendt's and Schmitt's theses (e.g., [[@sluga2012|Sluga 2012]]; [[@filippov2015|Филиппов 2015]]), which only exacerbates the problems of my reasoning.

Besides, I see it as unsatisfactory to consider the ontology of the political as a collision of particular worlds. For phenomenological analysis, measurements of home and alien worlds would be much better suited. The concept of the home-world determines the “structure of attitudinal multiplicity and the correlative horizons in my natural life” ([[@luft1998|Luft 1998]], 159). Home-world consists of many particular worlds, united in the [[attitude|attitude]] of [[normality|normality]], proximity, and intelligibility. Home-world is co-constituted with the [[alien-world|foreign-world]] that is strange, unfamiliar and alien to me. In other words, the thematization of the world-dimensions of home and foreign is much better suited for the transition to Schmitt's ontological and archeological interpretation. But at the same time, this is also a problem, since for such a transition it is necessary to firmly connect the concepts of the particular and home worlds, which at the moment has not yet been done by phenomenologists at a sufficiently high level.

Finally, the conclusion about the political as a figure of otherness seems to me extremely doubtful. Yes, of course, if we accept the thesis of radical otherness as the essential structure of any experience, then the political really appears as a figure of otherness. But, the question is, what does not appear in this case as a figure of otherness? Every particular world is the constitutive result of the strangeness that lives within us. The world as such is “[[nonego|non-ego]]” (ichfremde). In other words, the procedure of transcendental archeology carried out in this way does not give us any interesting results. But what would be an interesting result? I believe that it would be interesting to show, with the help of transcendental archeology, how in the passive genesis of otherness the distinction between the political and, for example, the social worlds takes place.

## Literature
- [[@filippov2015|Филиппов А.Ф. 2015. Ханна Арендт и Карл Шмитт: Два понятия политического, 52–65 // Современное значение идей Ханны Арендт. Изд-во БФУ им. И. Канта.]]
- [[@chernavin2011|Chernavin G. 2011. Transzendentale Archäologie – Ontologie – Metaphysik: Methodologische Alternativen in der phänomenologischen philosophie Husserls. Nordhausen: Traugott Bautz.]]
- [[@depraz1995a|Depraz N. 1995. Phenomenological Reduction and the Political // Husserl Studies 12(1).]]
- [[@drummond2000|Drummond J.J. 2000. Political community // Phenomenology of the Political. Springer.]]
- [[@geniusas2012|Geniusas S. 2012. The Origins of the Horizon in Husserl’s Phenomenology. Dordrecht: Springer.]]
- [[@held2012|Held K. 2012. Towards a phenomenology of the political world // The Oxford Handbook of Contemporary Phenomenology, 442-459. Oxford University Press.]]
- [[@husserl1950|Husserl E. (Hua I). 1950. Cartesianische Meditationen und Pariser Vorträge. Den Haag: Martinus Nijhoff.]]
- [[@lee2019|Lee N.-I. 2019. The Pluralistic Concept of the Life-World and the Various Fields of the Phenomenology of the Life-World // Husserl Husserl Studies 36 (1).]]
- [[@lohmar2003|Lohmar D. 2003. Husserl’s Type and Kant’s Schemata: Systematic Reasons for Their Correlation or Identity // The new Husserl: A Critical Reader. Indiana University Press]]
- [[@luft1998|Luft S. 1998. Husserl's phenomenological discovery of the natural attitude // Continental Philosophy Review 31(2).]]
- [[@majolino2015|Majolino C. 2015. Individuum and Region of Being: On the Unifying Principle of Husserl’s ‘Headless’ Ontology // Commentary on Husserl’s Ideas I. Berlin: De Gruyter.]]
- [[@marder2010|Marder M. 2010. Groundless existence: The political ontology of Carl Schmitt. New York: Continuum.]]
- [[@mensch2017|Mensch J. 2017. Life and the Reduction to the Life-World // Horizon. Феноменологические исследования 6(3).]]
- [[@miettinen2015|Miettinen T. 2015. Phenomenology and political idealism // Continental Philosophy Review 48(2): 237-253.]]
- [[@miettinen2020|Miettinen T. 2020. Husserl and the Idea of Europe. Northwestern University Press.]]
- [[@moran2011|Moran D. 2011. “Even the Papuan Is a Man and Not a Beast”: Husserl on Universalism and the Relativity of Cultures // Journal of the History of Philosophy 49(4): 463–494.]]
- [[@norris1998|Norris A. 1998. Carl Schmitt on Friends, Enemies and the Political // Telos 112: 68-88.]]
- [[@sartori1989|Sartori G. 1989. The essence of the political in Carl Schmitt // Journal of Theoretical Politics 1(1).]]
- [[@schmitt1991|Schmitt C. 1991. Glossarium: Aufzeichnungen der Jahre 1947–1951, ed. E. Freiherr von Medem. Berlin: Duncker & Humblot.]]
- [[@schmitt2002|Schmitt C. 2002. Ex Captivitate Salus: Efahrungen der Zeit 1945/47. Berlin: Duncker & Humblot.]]
- [[@schmitt2008|Schmitt C. 2008. The Concept of the Political: Expanded edition. Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press.]]
- [[@schutz1966b|Schutz A. 1966. Type and Eidos in Husserl’s Late Philosophy // Collected papers III. Studies in phenomenological philosophy. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.]]
- [[@sluga2012|Sluga H. 2012. Pluralism of the Political. From Carl Schmitt to Hannah Arendt // Studia Philosophica Wratislaviensia: 155–167.]]
- [[@sowa2008|Sowa R. 2008. Einleitung des Herausgebers // Die Lebenswelt: Auslegungen der vorgegebenen Welt und ihrer Konstitution. Dordrecht: Springer.]]
- [[@sowa2010|Sowa R. 2010. Husserls Idee einer nicht-empirischen Wissenschaft von der Lebenswelt // Husserl Studies 26(1).]]
- [[@steinbock1995|Steinbock A. 1995. Home and Beyond: Generative Phenomenology after Husserl. Northwestern University Press.]]
