---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/220619-essay-transcendental-genesis-of-the-higher-order-subjects/","dgHomeLink":false,"dgPassFrontmatter":false}
---

# The Problem of Community from the Phenomenological Perspective
## Introduction
The power of the phenomenological motto “to the things themselves” lies in the fact that every phenomenon under study must show itself to us in its [[self-givenness|self-givennes]]. Every phenomenological investigation should begin with an obvious contemplation of our subject matter. [[phenomenology|Phenomenology]], as a primarily descriptive science, assumes that any claimed state of affairs can be discerned and confirmed by anyone who undertakes [[phenomenological reflection|transcendental reflection]]. 

This research framework is best suited for analyzing the phenomenon of community. Why? Because [[community (Husserl)|collective consciousness]] as such is something that does not seem to be given to me with evidence in everyday experience. Of course, I encounter [[object (Husserl)|objects]], people, emotions, states of affairs, and so on. But do I really encounter “family”, “Russia”, “students”, rather than their singular representatives? Isn't it more rational to reduce everything to individual consciousnesses, assuming that their givenness is much more evident?

However, as the development of the phenomenological movement well demonstrates, [[evidence (Husserl)|evidence]] is not something that can be discerned at “one stroke”. Some states of affairs are so evident that they simply fall into the oblivion of [[natural attitude|everyday – natural – life]]. It is not without reason that phenomenologists speak of their discipline as a search for fundamental problems in fundamental trivialities and name it a science of the [[self-evidece|self-evident]] (Selbstverständlichkeit) ([[@taguchi2006|Taguchi 2006]], 2).

The problems of the self-evidence is also valid for a collective consciousness. The fact that its existence is not self-evident  does not mean that this self-evidentness cannot be obtained in the course of phenomenological research. However, we must immediately warn ourselves against ontological biases with the procedure of the [[epoché|phenomenological epoché]]. The existence of collective consciousness should not interest us in the sense of proof. That is, we will not prove that collective consciousnesses exist, just as we prove that various natural phenomena exist. After conducting the epoché, we must speak of existence as “existence”, that is, [[bracketing|put it in brackets]]. This will allow us to engage not in proving but in explicating, clarifying, how collective consciousness as such gives itself to us.

In the first part of the essay I will focus on this explication and try to [[thematization|thematize]] the [[givenness|givenness]] of the community. In the second part of the essay, – through [[eidetic reduction|eidetic reduction]], – I will attempt to describe some of the [[essence (Husserl)|essential]] properties of the We-subjectivity (which Miettinen calls a social ontology (see [[@miettinen2014|Miettinen 2014]])). In particular, I will focus on the topics of its tradition and “subjectivation”.

In this essay, I use the thesis form of presentation. The text is structured in the form of explicating exposition, in which the reader is invited to pay attention to a sequence of interrelated theses. Most of the theses are supplemented with comments that make up the main body of the essay. However, if the reader agrees with the thesis in advance, the comments can be skipped. The state of affairs is put in the thesis form if it is considered "necessary" for the reasoning. This necessity is not strict, like the necessity of formal proof, but – like any phenomenologically established state of affairs – has varying degrees of precision. The closer the reasoning is to the problem, the less extensiveness the thesis has. And vice versa. Most of the abstracts are supplemented with comments that expound them and make up the main body of the essay. The intention to use such a form is connected with a desire to bring phenomenological reasoning to rigor, as far as it is possible (On the impossibility of rigorous phenomenology see, however, [[@welton2000|Welton 2000]]).


## Phenomenality of the We-subjectivity
1. Every time I deal with an [[object (Husserl)|objectivity]].
	- Living in the [[world (Husserl)|world]] naturally given to me and being in the waking state, every time I deal with something: with things, people, [[situation (Husserl)|situation]], states of affairs, emotions, and so on. Everything that is given to me as a unity [[grasping|actively grasped]] by [[attention|attention]] can be designated under the general heading of objectivity.
2. Objectivities given in the [[natural attitude|natural attitude]] are objectivities that “are in the world”.
	- [[general thesis of the natural attitude|General thesis of the natural attitude]] presupposes not only non-thematizable belief in the existence of the world, but also a special mode of positing the “real” as such. Any objectivity given in the natural attitude is “objectivity in the world” ([[@lee2019|Lee 2019]], 10).
3. Objectivities given in the natural attitude are objectivities that “actually exist”.
	- I have a deal with objectivities that are given to me as “actually existing”. This objectivities’ “actual existence” in natural attitude is nothing but that from which I procced in my action. The phone lying in my hands is “something with which I can make a call”, “something I can break and have to be careful with”, “something that has buttons I can press”, and so on. We could treat any objectivity in natural attitude as readiness to hand (as Heiddeger ([[@heidegger1967|1967]]) understood it). But our concept should be wider. Because it also concerns “situations in the world”. The situation of “war”, “seminar”, “writing an essay in a library”, “crossing the road”, and other situations (or practices) intertwined with each other are objectivities from which I orient myself in the world.
	- The “actuality” of an objectivity is a condition of possibility of action in general. If the phone in front of me does not “actually exist”, why would I attempt to make a phone call using it?
4. Primal givenness of the world is the givenness of the world as a practical horizon (for more about this, see [[@pugliese2017|Pugliese 2017]]).
5. “Reality” is the concordant “reality”.
	- Based on (3), we might think that even a hallucination can quite “actually exist”. However, it is important to make a few clarifications here. A hallucination may well be valid insofar as it determines the [[ego (Husserl)|subjects’]] actions. If I discover that the phone I tried call from is just a hallucination, then this does not mean that it was not “real” for me at the moment when I tried to perform a certain action with it. But as soon as I discover the non-concordance of experience, that is, the mismatch of expectations and real actions, the givenness of the phone was modified form “actual” to “what is not actual”.
6. Objective “reality” is [[intersubjectivity (Husserl)|intersubjective]] “reality”.
	- We also could well imagine a situation in which the objectivity given to me as “real” turns out to be “non-existent” form the point of view of [[the other|Others]]. The situation of calling a friend may well turn out to be a “fake” phone conversation with a “non-existent” friend on a “non-existent” phone. This means that what “actually is” must be intersubjectively coordinated with Others (for this constitutive function of intersubjectivity, see [[@zahavi2001a|Zahavi 2001]]).
7. We-subjectivity is an objectivity among objectivities.
	- If “reality” of any objectivity is determined by its practical horizons (see 4), concordance in experience, and intersubjective coordination, then we may well speak of the “reality” of we-subjectivities ([[community (Husserl)|Wir-Subjektivität]]; in this context we can also use such identical terms as “common mind”, “suprapersonal consciousness”, and, of course, “collective consciousness”) as objectivities in the world. In everyday life we are dealing with a whole range of things, expressions and different achievements that cannot be attributed to a single subject: playing of a symphony orchestra, activities of the factory, scientific achievements of laboratories, attack on another country, etc. ([[@miettinen2014|Miettinen 2014]], 150). Even in much less pronounced circumstance, we are dealing with We-subjectivities. Whenever We walk with friends in the park, We write an exam with students, We ride the bus – every time We refer to activities of the We-subjectivity.
	- The “reality” of We-subjectivity in the natural attitude is isomorphic to the “reality” of every other objectivity. Just as I can “really” trip over an “existing” curb or throw a “real” stone into an equally “real” river, so can I “really” have my motherland come after me, have my firm fire me, and have my family disagreed with me.
	- Intersubjective [[givenness (Husserl)|givenness]] of We-subjectivities is similar to the intersubjective givenness of any objectivity. Russia is objectively “existing” as soon as we consider it as such and jointly proceed in our actions from this “reality”. And since intersubjective horizons are limited to [[particular world|special worlds]] (Sonderwelten) and [[home-world|home-worlds]] (Heimwelten) (for special world see [[@lee2019|Lee 2019]], 8-10; [[@luft1998|Luft 1998]], 157-158; for home-worlds see [[@steinbock1995|Steinbock 1995]], Section 4), Russia as subjectivity also implies different practical and inner horizons. Penetrating many cultures, we find differences in the distinctions of Russia as "really existing”. We can talk about “Russia as an aggressor” or “Russia as not identical to its government” or “Russia as a great country”, etc. Science, on the other hand, as a special [[universal horizon|universal horizon]], discovered in ancient Greece ([[@miettinen2020|Miettinen 2020]], 95), allows us to penetrate the [[horizon|horizon]] of the (cultural, sociological, and so on) study of Russia, which is “valid” for any [[home-world|home-world]].
8. We-subjectivity is a subjectivity of a higher order.
	- We-subjectivity, – in addition to (7), – is also an intentional subject It has a will, a stream of experiences in which it centers itself, and it also acts in the world. “It can have an appreciation of itself and a will to direct itself, a will to self-formation” ([[@husserl1988|Hua XXVII]], 48-49).
9. We-subjectivity = community = higher-order subjectivity = suprapersonal consciousness =subjective totality.
10. The mode of givenness of We-subjectivity: the social unit of which I am, – or the Other is, – a member.
	- The mode of givenness of We-subjectivity differs from the mode of givenness of the Other. If the Other is given to me in active positing exclusively as a subjectivity similar to me, but at the same time inaccessible to direct grasp (see [[@husserl1950|Hua I]], § 43), then We-subjectivity is given to me, first, as unity of which I am a member, and, second as expressing itself in the actions of its participants, including my own actions (understood in a broad sense - that is, as acts in general; see [[@dzanic2020|Džanić 2020]], 43-51).
	- Whenever I [[experience|experience]] a We-subjectivity, I experience it either as a direct participant or as one who faces the action – or the action already embodied in something – of its participants ([[@carr1987a|Carr 1987]], 267-278). Thus, in the case of my colleagues and I looking at the Eiffel Tower, I am conscious of my perception as intertwined with the perceptions of the other participants in this We. It is not difficult to express this as a pun often repeated in everyday life: I know that you know, that I know that you know, and so on. But in the case of phenomenological explication, this active knowledge has to be transformed into [[passivity (Husserl)|passive consciousness]], which is the condition of the possibility of the unity of the We-subjectivity’s action. I am aware that the Other with whom we [[perception|perceive]] the Eiffel Tower perceives it from another perspective, that he sees aspects of it that are inaccessible to me. I am also aware that the Other is aware, first, that I, in turn, perceive aspects of the object that are inaccessible to him and, second, that I “know that he knows it”. This co-perception of the object through the interweaving of the experiences of me and the Other creates a We-subjectivity that integrates the actions of all its participants and thus is not reducible to any of them.
11. We-subjectivity is founded on the conjoining of individuals’ acts ([[@miettinen2014|Miettinen 2014]], 160).
12. Conjoining of individuals’ acts is conscious as modification of acting to co-acting and intentional object to common object.

## Ontology of the We-Subjectivity (Social Ontology)
13. Every objectivity has its [[inner horizon|inner horizon]].
	- Every objectivity has [[predicate|properties]] (/predicates /accidents /aspects). The properties connected to each other through associative [[synthesis (Husserl)|synthesis]] form the inner horizon of the objectivity, which is always awakened and projected in anticipations when I actively grasp this objectivity. By actively grasping the objectivity I awake not the whole [[horizon (Husserl)|horizon]] (and horizons related to it) but only those its parts which are involved in the current [[situation|situation]]. I hardly apperceive the backside of my laptop, whenever I type my essay.
14. Every inner horizon undergoes sedimentation into type.
	- Created associations between objectivities and their properties are [[retention|retained]] in consciousness and merge together as [[type (Husserl)|types]] in a pitfall of our unconsciousness. These types dynamically [[institution (Husserl)|institute]] and re-institute (Stiftung and Nachstiftung) the content-structure of every inner horizon. It is thanks to typified [[sedimentation (Husserl)|sedimentations]] that we are able to actively grasp objectivity as such. The passive process of associative synthesis and retention precedes any activity.
15. Every objectivity is given in the horizon of sedimented typicality.
16. (Since (15) => ) Personality is a substratum of sedimented habitualities.
	- Taking as a premise (10-12), we can affirm the following state of affairs. Personality is the substrate of habitualities. Every action we take, every decision we make, everything that we actively rely on, then becomes what we proceed from in our actions in the [[world (Husserl)|world]]. This does not mean that institutionalized decisions cannot be changed or ingrained habits cannot be reversed. On the contrary, in place of previously instituted meanings, new ones can be established, consigning the old ones to oblivion. Such a logic presupposes that even the institution of objectivity as such, – since it is a stage in the [[passive genesis|passive genesis]] of transcendental subjectivity, –  can be abolished with proper preparation.
17. (Since (8) & (16) => ) We-subjectivity is a personality of a higher order (Personalität höherer Ordnung).
18. (Since (8) => ) We-subjectivity has [[memory (Husserl)|memory]].
	- And just like subjectivity, We-subjectivity has, on the one hand, passive memory, that is, the ability to awaken sedimented habitualities, due to which any experience and action becomes possible, and, on the other hand, active memory, that is, the ability to remember.
19. Memory of a We-subjectivity is [[tradition|tradition]].
	- Just as subjectivity has historical horizons that make up its personality, so We-subjectivity has historical horizons that make up its tradition. In fact, (19) is implicitly embedded in (16). The tradition of We-subjectivity seems to be analogous to the [[unconsciousness|unconsciousness]] of the [[subject|subject]]. Both can be conceptualized with the apt notions of a “pool of memory” or a “palimpsest”. In contrast to the historicity of the subject, however, the problem of generativity enters into the historicity of the We-subjectivity. We-subjectivity is a subjectivity that does not end with the departure of its individual members. It reproduces itself through the entry into it of new participants.
	- Old members of We-subjectivity pass forward the sense unities of tradition (and so the tradition itself) to new ones. “The inherited sense and meaning are never given to us in full intuitive evidence; we are in touch with signs and symbols whose world has permanently deceased, we are addressed by narratives that have been handed down to us” ([[@miettinen2020|Miettinen 2020]], 69). The new members of the We-subjectivity get within already instituted historicity and appropriate it. The process of appropriation cannot be seen as a passive process of acquiring ready-made knowledge or skills. Since the inheritance of tradition's sense-unities involves their partial loss, and since its inheritance is essentially a re-institution, the new participants of also become responsible for the preservation and passing forward of tradition. At any moment it can be rejected, forgotten, altered, or warped. 
20. We-subjectivity acts whenever the I co-presents the Other, simultaneously co-experiencing a common object for them.
	- It might seem that if I were to go to a desert island, I would be there, not We. There would be no Other on the island who would co-experience with me everything that happens on the island. However, this view distorts the essential properties of the We-subjectivity that we can discover. First, suppose that I got out of that island and was told that, under unexplained circumstances, other people also got into thousands of other uninhabited islands at the same time as me. And then got out of them at the same time. Doesn't it turn out that in this representation of the situation, we may well speak of We-Subjectivity as a community of Robinsons trying to survive on a multitude of uninhabited islands. Now that I have been informed of this news, I may well co-substantiate Others with the common experience of “survival on a desert island”. Similarly, we can speak of the We-subjectivity of men who "objectify women”. It also follows that any category of people can be “subjectivized” to a community, as soon as we are able to ascribe to them a co-directivity toward a common object. That is why of I invent a time machine, it does mean that it is invented by Russia, generation Z, or any posited higher-order subjectivity.
21. (Since 20 =>) Any category (of people) can be “subjectivized” into We-subjectivity.


## Conclusion
As should be readily apparent in (16, 17), the general statements about We-subjectivity’s passive and active memory do not seem to be too specific. How are sedimented habitualities awakened? How are the horizons and actions of participants in social unity intertwined? How does the conflict of perspectives play out in the actual We-subjectivity’s live-experiences (including the act of memory)? What are the ways of coordinating between the participants of the commemorating We-subjectivity? These are clearly significant questions, but they should be placed as separate topics. Why? Much of this has to do with the peculiarities of eidetic research, which has been produced here as well. Since eidetic states of affairs are included in each other, it does not seem reasonable to consider the less general eidetic states of affairs until the more general ones have been considered. Thus, since commemoration is an act along with the other acts of We-subjectivity, – [[perception|perception]], [[fantasy|fantasy]], [[expectation|expectation]], and so on, – it would be appropriate first to consider, 1) the essential arguments that help to distinguish acts of We-subjectivity from subjectivity, and 2) the essential arguments that distinguish commemoration from remembrance. In addition, the need for a more thorough eidetic study of the interweaving of horizons also seems important.

Nevertheless, the results obtained can be seen as apodictically evident statements, true for any collective consciousness and its memory. And it is precisely this [[apodictic evidence|apodictic evidence]] that has a [[proto-sociology|proto-sociological]] value to us. It is assumed that a sociologist guided by such transcendental reflections could concretize them and discover the increasingly complex constitutive structures of We-subjectivity, which are not accessible to phenomenological reasoning. This interesting symbiose might someday become what [[Luckmann|Luckmann]] once called “[[parallel action|parallel action]]” between [[sociology|sociology]] and [[phenomenology|phenomenology]] ([[@luckmann1979|Luckmann 1979]], 197).


## Literature
- [[@carr1987a|Carr D. 1987. Interpreting Husserl. Critical and Comparative Studies. Dordrecht: Martinus Nijhoff.]]
- [[@dzanic2020|Džanić D. 2020. The Earth and Pregivenness in Transcendental Phenomenology // Research in Phenomenology 50(1).]]
- [[@heidegger1967|Heidegger M. 1967. Sein und Zeit. Tübingen: Max Niemeyer.]]
- [[@husserl1950|Husserl E. (Hua I). 1950. Cartesianische Meditationen und Pariser Vorträge. Den Haag: Martinus Nijhoff.]]
- [[@husserl1988|Husserl E. (Hua XXVII). 1988. Aufsätze und Vorträge. 1922–1937. The Hague, Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers. ]]
- [[@lee2019|Lee N.-I. 2019. The Pluralistic Concept of the Life-World and the Various Fields of the Phenomenology of the Life-World // Husserl Husserl Studies 36 (1).]]
- [[@luft1998|Luft S. 1998. Husserl's phenomenological discovery of the natural attitude // Continental Philosophy Review 31(2).]]
- [[@miettinen2014|Miettinen T. 2014. Transcendental Social Ontology // Phenomenology and the Transcendental. Routledge.]]
- [[@miettinen2020|Miettinen T. 2020. Husserl and the Idea of Europe. Northwestern University Press.]]
- [[@pugliese2017|Pugliese A. 2017. Lebenswelt als praktischer Horizont // Horizon. Феноменологические исследования 6(2).]]
- [[@steinbock1995|Steinbock A. 1995. Home and Beyond: Generative Phenomenology after Husserl. Northwestern University Press.]]
- [[@taguchi2006|Taguchi S. 2006. Das Problem des ‘Ur-Ich’ bei Edmund Husserl. Dordrecht: Springer.]]
- [[@welton2000|Welton D. 2000. The Other Husserl. The Horizons of Transcendental Phenomenology. Indiana University Press.]]
- [[@zahavi2001a|Zahavi D. 2001. Husserl and transcendental intersubjectivity: A response to the linguistic-pragmatic critique. Ohio University Press.]]
