---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/genetic-reduction/","dgHomeLink":false,"dgPassFrontmatter":false}
---

# genetic reduction
- genetic reduction
	- 0 is a way to [[genetic phenomenology|genetic dimension]] of [[Husserl|Husserl’s]] [[phenomenology|phenomenology]] ([[@bower2020|@bower2020]], 191).
	- [[Bower|Bower]] suggests that genetic turn in Husserl’s phenomenology could be explicated by the term “genetic reduction” because its entire aim is to redeem the claim of the [[ways into phenomenology|ways into reduction]] to explain [[constitution|constitution]] ([[@bower2020|@bower2020]], 192).
- genetic reduction and the [[ways into phenomenology|ways into phenomenology]]
	- [[Bower|Bower]] claims that 0  is indirect, and is at least one step removed from the familiar [[ways into phenomenology|ways into reduction]] ([[@bower2020|@bower2020]], 191). The [[Cartesian reduction|Cartesian reduction]] is an absolute dead end, insofar as it insists on [[adequate evidence|adequate evidence]]. The [[ontological reduction|ontological reduction]] serve as a springboard into genetic phenomenology. It leads indirectly to [[genetic constitution|genetic constitution]] through a consistent [[questioning back|questioning back]]. The [[psychological reduction|psychological reduction]] serve as a springboard into genetic phenomenology. It finds its way there through its depth analysis of [[consciousness|consciousness]] as concrete personality. Genetic reduction follows from both ontological or psychological reductions ([[@bower2020|@bower2020]], 192).
	- Bower’s point of view is opposed by the [[Lee|Nam-In Lee’s]] claim that it is the psychological reduction in particular that leads to the genetic analysis of the [[instinct (Husserl)|instincts]] (see [[@lee1993|Lee 1993]], 65) and by [[Steinbock|Steinbock’s]] claim that it is the ontological reduction in particular that leads to genetic phenomenology (see [[@steinbock1995|Steinbock 1995]], 79-85).
	- Bower claims that it is not necessary to concern “two separate ways of turning to [[genetic constitution|genetic constitution]]” (ontological and psychological) because they are not so different ([[@bower2020|@bower2020]], 192). He suggests that ontological and psychological ways are “really the same”, but only with different emphases (see more in [[psychological reduction & ontological reduction|psychological reduction & ontological reduction]]).